---
layout: post
title: Tracing msgrcv with ltrace
tags: ltrace msgrcv
---

[ltrace](https://ltrace.org/) is a tool for tracing dynamic library calls. I use it from time to time and this time I needed to trace the `msgrcv` system call. Usually, you would use [strace](https://strace.io/) to trace the system calls, but I need an output of both library calls and system calls. One interesting feature is that I don't need to trace the actual system calls using the `-S` flag and can trace the `libc` system call wrappers instead:

```
msgrcv@libc.so.6(0x10002, 0x5634e4d2db08, 4712, 0xffffffffc0000000) = 708 <0.828835>

```

So far so good, but the output is not very useful as I don't see the message received. `ltrace` properly displays the most common library calls but for some reason not the `msgrcv` and several others like `semop` and `shmat`. Luckily for me `ltrace` can use function prototype descriptions from a custom `ltrace.conf` file. `msgrcv` is a tricky function to describe: just like `read` and similar functions, it uses output parameter and the length of the data is returned by the function. In addition to that, the output parameter is a complex type. My first attempt at configuration got me pretty far:

```
long msgrcv(int, +struct(long, array(char, retval))*, ulong, long, hex(int));
```

An important detail is the `+` sign before the output parameter. `ltrace` will wait until the function returns and will display the rest of the parameters after that. The second important detail is specifying the length of the data as `retval` (an alias for `arg0`). It is the value function returned. I could have used the `arg3` and show the full content of the second argument but using the function result allows to show only the portion of the array that is filled:


```
msgrcv@libc.so.6(65538, { 536870912, [ '{', '\0', '\0', '\0', '\002' ] }, 4712, -1073741824, 0) = 5 <19.964097>
```

I was very happy until the `msgrcv` system call failed. The function returned a `-1` which was interpreted as an unsigned integer and `ltrace` printed a huge amount of junk until it hit the limit of array size to be printed. Turns out this issue is described in the "to do" list of the `ltrace` for many years without any progress. But the same "to do" revealed that there is a workaround. I can wrap the `retval` in `zero()` and the result will be much better:


```
long msgrcv(int, +struct(long, array(char, zero(retval)))*, ulong, long, hex(int));
```

The only downside is that I get an error message for failing calls, but it is much easier to deal with than kilobytes of junk:


```
msgrcv@libc.so.6(3833859 <no return ...>
error: maximum array length seems negative
, { 0, [ '{' ] }, 4712, 0, 0x800)                                       = -1 <0.000520>
```
